draft-pot-authentication-link.md, before:

---
date: 2019-05-02
title: "Link relationship types for authentication"
docname: draft-pot-authentication-link-00
category: std
author:
 -
    ins: E. Pot
    name: Evert Pot
    email: me@evertpot.com
    uri: https://evertpot.com/
normative:
  RFC8288:

--- abstract

This specification defines a set of relationships that may be used
to indicate where a user may authenticate, log out, register a new
account or find out who is currently authenticated.

--- middle

# Introduction

{{RFC8288}} defines a framework and registry for Link Relationships types.
This specification defines a set of new relationship types to aid clients
in discovering endpoints for authentication and registration:
`authenticate`, `authenticated-as`, `logout` and `register-user`.

# authenticate

The `authenticate` can be used to link to a resource that hosts
a page where a user can authenticate itself for the current resource.

For example, this link might refer to a HTML login page.

Example:

~~~ html
<a href="/login" rel="authenticate">Login</a>
~~~

This specification doesn't define the authentication protocol. For example,
the link could refer to an OAuth2 authorization endpoint.

# authenticated-as

The `authenticated-as` link refers to a resource that describes the effective
authenticated user for a HTTP response.

Following this link might allow a client to answer the question 'who am I?'.
This might link to a user profile page, or it might link to an API that
returns a JSON response with user information.

Example:

~~~ http
Link: <https://api.example.org/users/123-abc>; rel="authenticated-as"
~~~

# logout

The `logout` refers to a resource where an authenticated user
might end their session.

In a browser this might clear cookies, or in the case of OAuth2 it could
revoke any active authentication tokens.

# register-user

The `register-user` Link Relation refers to a resource where a user might
sign up for a service for the context URI.

The linked resource might contain a HTML registration form, or otherwise
instructions that allow a client to find out how to sign up for the service.

# IANA considerations

This document defines `authenticate`, `authenticated-as`, `logout` and
`register-user` link relation types and adds them to the "Link Relations"
registry:

## authenticate link relation

- Relation name: authenticate
- Description: Refers to a resource where a client may authenticate for the
  the context URI.
- Reference: TBD

## authenticated-as link relation

- Relation name: authenticated-as
- Description: Refers to a resource that describes the authenticated entity
  for the HTTP response.
- Reference: TBD

## logout link relation

- Relation name: logout 
- Description: Refers to an endpoint where a client may invalidate the current
  authentication session.
- Reference: TBD

## register-user link relation

- Relation name: register-user
- Description: Refers to a resource where a client may create a new user
  account for the context URI.
- Reference: TBD

--- back

# Changelog

## Changes since -00

*

Commit message:

More examples.
@dret what do you think, is this a good way to solve your issue #1.

draft-pot-authentication-link.md, after:

---
date: 2019-05-02
title: "Link relationship types for authentication"
docname: draft-pot-authentication-link-00
category: std
author:
 -
    ins: E. Pot
    name: Evert Pot
    email: me@evertpot.com
    uri: https://evertpot.com/
normative:
  RFC8288:

--- abstract

This specification defines a set of relationships that may be used
to indicate where a user may authenticate, log out, register a new
account or find out who is currently authenticated.

--- middle

# Introduction

{{RFC8288}} defines a framework and registry for Link Relationships types.
This specification defines a set of new relationship types to aid clients
in discovering endpoints for authentication and registration:
`authenticate`, `authenticated-as`, `logout` and `register-user`.

## Usage examples

### Browsers

Many websites already provide these features. If these links are annotated
with a standard relationship type, it might allow browser extensions to
automatically discover these and present them in new ways. It could for
example show a browser-level logout button.

Link relationships such as these could appear on any page where Sign in,
Register, Log in or Log out features exist.

### Web services

Many webservices provide a resource to discover more information about the
authenticated entity. Creating standard link relationships might allow a
generic client to discover information about the currently logged in user.

Similarly, an `authenticate` link could allow a generic client to find
an OAuth2 Authorization endpoint.

This link relationship could appear on any API endpoint where this might be
relevant, or it might just show up on central endpoint discovery document.

# authenticate

The `authenticate` can be used to link to a resource that hosts
a page where a user can authenticate itself for the current resource.

For example, this link might refer to a HTML login page.

Example:

~~~ html
<a href="/login" rel="authenticate">Login</a>
~~~

# authenticated-as

The `authenticated-as` link refers to a resource that describes the effective
authenticated user for a HTTP response.

Following this link might allow a client to answer the question 'who am I?'.
This might link to a user profile page, or it might link to an API that
returns a JSON response with user information.

Example:

~~~ http
Link: <https://api.example.org/users/123-abc>; rel="authenticated-as"
~~~

# logout

The `logout` refers to a resource where an authenticated user
might end their session.

In a browser this might clear cookies, or in the case of OAuth2 it could
revoke any active authentication tokens.

# register-user

The `register-user` Link Relation refers to a resource where a user might
sign up for a service for the context URI.

The linked resource might contain a HTML registration form, or otherwise
instructions that allow a client to find out how to sign up for the service.

# IANA considerations

This document defines `authenticate`, `authenticated-as`, `logout` and
`register-user` link relation types and adds them to the "Link Relations"
registry:

## authenticate link relation

- Relation name: authenticate
- Description: Refers to a resource where a client may authenticate for the
  the context URI.
- Reference: TBD

## authenticated-as link relation

- Relation name: authenticated-as
- Description: Refers to a resource that describes the authenticated entity
  for the HTTP response.
- Reference: TBD

## logout link relation

- Relation name: logout 
- Description: Refers to an endpoint where a client may invalidate the current
  authentication session.
- Reference: TBD

## register-user link relation

- Relation name: register-user
- Description: Refers to a resource where a client may create a new user
  account for the context URI.
- Reference: TBD

--- back

# Changelog

## Changes since -00

*
